Bipolar disorder (BD) II is more likely to be misdiagnosed as major depressive disorder (MDD) than other types of BD, leading to incorrect treatment and poor outcomes. Previous studies have shown inconsistent results regarding the differences in cognitive deficits between the two disorders. To eliminate the compounding effects of medication and aging, we sought to investigate changes in cognitive function in medication-naïve, non-late-life patients with BDII and MDD.
Mental disorders are common during the perinatal period and expose mother and child to major risks.  Almost all women in Sweden attend maternal and child health care centers regularly before and after birth. This constitutes a unique opportunity to detect women with early signs of mental disorder or at risk of recurrence of prior illness. Identified women need fast access to diagnostic and treatment providers with specialized knowledge on perinatal mental disorders. As perinatal mental disorders can have severe consequences for mothers and their children a tight cooperation between caregivers is often needed.
It is increasingly recognised that persons with mental illness experience physical health issues at greater rates than the general population and that there are significant barriers to accessing appropriate treatment. One less obvious barrier to appropriate care may be the law. This review examines the legal regimes within Australia and New Zealand that regulate consent for medical and surgical treatment for persons detained under mental health legislation. The review begins with a brief overview of concepts of consent and capacity then examines the law with regards to consent for non-psychiatric treatment for persons detained in psychiatric facilities. The complexity and cross-jurisdictional consistency is considered and potential future directions and possibilities for reform are discussed.
To determine whether Calmer Life (CL) improved worry, generalized anxiety disorder-related (GAD-related) symptoms, anxiety, depression, sleep, trauma-related symptoms, functional status, and quality of life better than Enhanced Community Care with Resource Counseling (ECC-RC) at 6 months and 9 months.
Aims and methodAn 'assertive approach' to clozapine, where nasogastric administration is approved, is assessed through a case-load analysis to provide the first systematic description of its use and outcomes worldwide.
Anxiety is among the most prevalent and disabling mental health problems in older adults. Few older adults with mild to moderately severe anxiety symptoms receive adequate interventions, putting them at risk for developing anxiety disorders, depression, and various somatic problems. Effective, low-threshold interventions should be developed. Blended care, in which a web-based intervention is combined with a limited amount of face-to-face contacts with a mental healthcare counselor at the general practice, is a promising option. The online self-help intervention "Living to the Full"-an Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) intervention-has been proven to reduce depression and anxiety in several patient groups, but has not yet been investigated in older adults. The aim of this study is to evaluate the (cost-)effectiveness of a blended form of "Living to the Full" in reducing anxiety symptoms in adults aged 55 to 75 years. Furthermore, moderators and mediators of the treatment effect are investigated.
Despite increasing numbers of refugee women-at-risk being resettled and their potential vulnerability, there exists no empirical research into the psychiatric health of this unique subgroup with which to guide policy and practice. This research aimed to investigate psychiatric symptom status of a sample of refugee women-at-risk recently resettled in Australia, as well as factors contributing to symptoms of trauma, anxiety, depression, and somatization. The level of psychiatric symptomatology is compared to reference groups of women from Sudan and Burma, who entered Australia under the Humanitarian Entry Programme, and who did not meet criteria as women-at-risk.
BackgroundAssessing functioning and disability among individuals with mental and behavioral health disorders has historically relied on deriving accurate psychiatric diagnoses and assessing symptoms. However, growing empirical evidence suggests that this approach is inadequate to determine real world performance, particularly with respect to work.ObjectiveWe examined a performance-based approach to the assessment of work functioning and its relationship to mental and behavioral health status.MethodsA cross-sectional study was conducted at two mental health programs. Trained employment providers conducted performance-based assessments of work function and ratings of mental and behavioral health while study participants self-reported their mental/behavioral health functioning. We hypothesized that participant and provider ratings of mental/behavioral health would be at moderately correlated and with performance-based assessments of work function.ResultsWe found no significant correlation between participants' self-report of their mental and behavioral health and performance-based assessments of work. Employment providers' ratings of participants' mental/behavioral health were moderately correlated with performance-based measures of work. Finally, we found low concordance between employment providers and study participants' with respect to ratings of their mental/behavioral health.ConclusionsContrary to our hypotheses, ratings of mental/behavioral health were only moderately correlated to performance-based measures of work. Results confirm earlier research suggesting that it is difficult to predict work performance from participants' self-reports of their mental/behavioral health alone. Performance-based assessments of work capacity as well as ratings of mental and behavioral health may both be needed for a more complete and complimentary picture of the ability of individuals with mental and behavioral health disorders to function in the work place.
Individuals suffering from psychiatric disorders experience high levels of illness burden and a significantly reduced quality of life. Despite targeted psychopharmacological strategies and complementary psychotherapeutic procedures only moderate effects are obtained, and the risk of relapse is high in many patients. Worldwide, psychiatric diseases such as depression are continuously increasing, challenging the personal life of the affected as well as their families, but also whole societies by increasing disability, early retirement and hospitalization. According to current scientific knowledge psychiatric disorders are caused by a multifactorial pathogenesis, including genetics, inflammation and neurotransmitter imbalance; furthermore, also lifestyle-associated factors gain rising importance. In line with this, there is growing evidence that the gut microbiota and nutrition have an impact on the onset and course of psychiatric disorders.
Drug treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) with stimulants, such as methylphenidate, has been widespread across the developed countries and is also becoming common in adults. However, this seemingly effective treatment is not without controversy on the evidence that supports their use. In addition, disparities in the frequency of its use across the world are tremendous. Although stimulants are one of the standard therapies for ADHD, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) lacks such a drug treatment. Focusing on neurogenetic conditions with defined genetic abnormalities, which have ASD as a co-existing symptom, a search for a druggable target of ASD continues.
Most individuals with eating disorders do not receive treatment for their eating disorder. Closing this "treatment gap" requires a quantitative examination of individuals' attitudes towards accessing various types of treatment and of individuals' perceived barriers to seeking treatment. Thus, we recruited a sample of 425 individuals with either diagnosed or undiagnosed eating disorders and asked them to complete a survey assessing treatment attitudes, treatment barriers, and eating disorder symptom severity. Undiagnosed individuals reported more positive attitudes towards novel Internet- and smartphone-delivered treatments, and stronger barriers relating to eating disorders mental health literacy, than diagnosed individuals. Nevertheless, both diagnosed and undiagnosed individuals were broadly more positive towards established (i.e., non-novel) treatments than novel treatments. The strongest barriers to seeking treatment were fear of losing control, fear of change, and finding motivation to change. Eating disorder symptoms were positively associated with the strength of most treatment barriers. Results were broadly unchanged after adjusting for individuals' past experiences of treatment. In conclusion, the development and dissemination of novel treatments and the provision of eating disorders mental health literacy may offer promising potential pathways into treatment for individuals with undiagnosed eating disorders. Nevertheless, researchers must pay attention and improve, individuals' attitudes towards accessing these novel treatments. The positive correlations of symptom severity with treatment barrier strength highlights the importance of early intervention for individuals with eating disorders. Finally, the fear of losing control may be a uniquely salient treatment barrier for individuals with eating disorders that requires greater attention in future research on eating disorder treatment seeking.
Mental health reform in Australia emphasises recovery, partnership working and prioritises consumers' needs over professionals'. Occupational therapy students must develop capabilities for working in this way. Learning from consumers' lived experience of mental illness and recovery is considered critical to developing such capabilities and aligns with occupational therapy programme accreditation for consumer involvement in designing, delivering and evaluating curricula. No definitive capability standards exist to inform curricula and little is known about Australian mental health consumers' preferred modes of involvement in health professional education. This study sought to identify consumers' priorities for curricula, and ways in which they would like to participate in entry-level student education.
Dystonia, one of the most common childhood movement disorders, is often medically refractory and can lead to profound impacts on the child and their caretakers' quality of life. Limited efficacy of pharmacological treatments has fueled enthusiasm for innovative neurosurgical approaches, notably deep brain stimulation (DBS) as a treatment for refractory dystonia. Areas covered: DBS is increasingly applied to successfully treat childhood dystonia. While generally safe and effective, results vary widely depending on underlying dystonia etiology. The current work synthesizes and highlights advances in research pertaining to the use of DBS for childhood dystonia. The efficacy of DBS for children and youth with dystonia is discussed, with analysis divided among etiological subtypes. The role of DBS as a lifesaving treatment for status dystonicus is also reviewed. Expert Commentary: When carefully selected, certain children and youth with dystonia experience significant symptomatic improvement after DBS. Beyond dystonic symptoms, DBS can improve quality of life and reduce caretaker burden.
The aim of this study was to verify dog-assisted therapy's effectiveness on depression and anxiety in institutionalized elderly. Patients' illness perception was examined to identify core beliefs regarding mood, personal control, and illness coherence because they can affect treatment compliance. Subjective perception of pain, social interaction, and setting-bound observable variables were also studied.
To assess the efficacy and tolerability of lithium for the treatment of acute mania in children and adolescent diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
